Title: Ways to contribute to open source projects!
Date: 2018-10-27
Tags: open-source
Category: open-source

![OpenSource](files/img/20181027-opensource.png)

Writing code is not the only way you can contribute to an open source project.
Like any other project, there are many tasks which are not programming, but are
required to push the project forward, and many programmers are not even
necessarily good at those tasks. Think of organizing meetups, UI/UX design,
documentation, and translation as some examples. You can read more about these
[here](https://opensource.com/life/16/1/8-ways-contribute-open-source-without-writing-code).

This post is by far not an exhaustive list of what can be done, rather what I
have personally been engaged with. Let's assume you start using a piece of
software as a library in of your projects, and through time you want to get
engaged with it more.

Please always remember that many of these packages are maintained by volunteers
and they're not always immediately available to respond to your questions,
suggestions, or contributions, so be patient.

As a user, one of the first things you may do is to read the documentation of
the package (and hopefully that exists for the package you're going to use). For
most libraries out there, the documentation may be sparse, incomplete, or at
times incomprehensible. Although in some cases it may be the case that you need
to cover some background to better understand what you're reading, but in most
cases it's the documentation you're reading which is not perfect. Unfortunately,
it's not easy to convince core developers to write good and extensive
documentation, since they're mostly busy implementing new features or fixing
reported bugs and issues.

Some packages allow you to suggest an edit to the documentation on the fly, from
the browser itself, which removes the initial barrier for many to start
contributing.
[Elasticsearch](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/getting-started.html)
is a good example. As a new user, you probably pay attention to the
documentation probably more than anybody else. Therefore you may find mistakes
or see potential easy improvements which are usually not noticed by other more
experienced users and developers. Be encouraged to suggest any change you deem
appropriate. It may be accepted immediately, or it may start a whole
conversation about a certain aspect of the software. Some of my contributions
have been as small as a punctuation, to make the sentence a bit easier to
understand.
