Title: FOSDEM 2020
Date: 2020-01-15
Tags: conference, community
Category: blog

![fosdem20](https://fosdem.org/2020/assets/2020cake-e330eb83a6c466bcd67e7cb3291985576c4fd4f43ff954053ec0acf6c00991ab.jpg)

This was my first [FOSDEM](https://fosdem.org/2020/), which has been happening
in Brussels every year for the past 20 years! It's kind of a mostly talk based
hacker space with no registration required for the attendees. This year the
estimate was 5000 attendees each day, and that doesn't include the fringe
events happening around the main event. The [fringe
itself](https://fosdem.org/2020/fringe/) has tons of events and I managed to
attend one or two.

The whole thing has an interesting format; you have the main organization team
and then the dev rooms, all handled by volunteers, and with a perfectly
functional delegation system. The dev room volunteers have complete control
over what happens there, given a few general rules and principles like fire
safety and a CoC.

It was interesting to see that they had very few sponsors, and most sponsors
would contribute through service rather than money, _e.g._ providing the venue,
or the cabling system or the recycled laptops to process the videos.

Another point which I'd like to take to PyData conferences is that the video
review was done predominantly by speakers. I received an email after my talk, I
then suggested exact start/finish times, audio channel, etc., and with all that
your video would be up and done within an hour after your talk.

It's truly impressive to see what they've done with volunteer work and minimal
external services. It's also interesting from a planning point of view that
they manage the whole thing w/o ever knowing who's coming and how many. Of
course there are long lines behind most of the dev room doors waiting to get
in, but usually you wouldn't wait for more than a talk's time long and that was
mostly around half an hour.

One thing which stroke me was the poor gender diversity of the conference and
the speakers. The Python room for instance, where I gave my talk, had 0 female
speakers. The diversity wasn't much better among attendees either, and it was
worse in some rooms than others.

There were two events/rooms which I particularly found interesting and met a
ton of really cool people in them were the
[CHAOScon](https://chaoss.community/chaosscon-2020-eu/) and the [community dev
room](https://fosdem.org/2020/schedule/track/community_devroom/). We had really
interesting discussions and talks about how to build a community around a
project, how to measure community's health, and how to sustain it. Most
definitely useful for the communities I'm involved with.

I also gave a talk on [How to write a scikit-learn compatible
estimator/transformer](https://fosdem.org/2020/schedule/event/python2020_scikit_learn_estimator/)
with the
[video](https://mirrors.dotsrc.org/fosdem/2020/UA2.252A/python2020_scikit_learn_estimator.webm)
and the
[material](https://github.com/adrinjalali/talks/blob/master/sklearn-estimator-fosdem-2020/custom_estimators.ipynb)
both available. It was the first time I presented something (other than
opening/closing remarks of a conference) to ~500 people. It was such a pleasure
and privilege to do so.

I guess I'll try to be more engaged with the community related communities next
year if I end up going, and should definitely plan my time better. It's
overwhelming and exhausting to try and figure things out there. The talks are
also all live streamed, that's also something to use.
